# Container-Explorer

Container-Explorer is a tool to explore containerd installation on a mounted image.

Container-Explorer attempts to provide the similar exploration functionalities provided by `ctr` utility.

Container-Explorer provides the following options:

- Explore namespaces
- Explore containers
- Explore snapshots 
- Explore images
- Explore contents
- Mount container

## Usage

### Using Virtual Machine Image

Container-Explorer can explore an offline `containerd` by using a commandline switch `--image-root` that
refers the location of mounted image containing `containerd`. The section below shows the container-explorer
commands:

1. Mount the image containing containerd

```
# sudo mount -o ro /mnt/tags/tag001 /mnt/cases/case001
```

2. Run `container-explorer` commands to explore containers

```
# container-explorer --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 list namespaces
# container-explorer --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 list containers
# container-explorer --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 list snapshots
# container-explorer --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 list images
# container-explorer --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 list contents
```

3. Identify the container that needs investigation. Note the container ID and namespace

```
# sudo container-explorer -n <namespace> --image-root /mnt/cases/case001 <container_id> /mnt/container
```

**NOTE**: `container-explorer` assumes that mount point `/mnt/container` already exists.

4. Perform analysis of the mounted container
5. Unmount the mounted container

```
# sudo umount /mnt/container
```

### Using `containerd` Directory

`containerd` uses `/var/lib/containerd` as the default directory. Analyst can copy 
`/var/lib/containerd` and use it for analysis.

The figure shows `container-explorer` commands to analyse a copied directory.

```
# container-explorer -c test_data/var/lib/containerd list namespaces
# container-explorer -n default -c test_data/var/lib/containerd mount nginx-demo /tmp/mnt/case01
```

### Using bolt Databases

containerd stores information in bolt (https://pkg.go.dev/go.etcd.io/bbolt) database.
containerd uses the following two databases:

- `/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.metadata.v1.bolt/meta.db`
- `/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.snapshotter.v1.overlayfs/metadata.db`

Analyst can use the following `container-explorer` commands to explore containerd settings.

```
# container-explorer -m test_data/meta.db -s test_data/metadata.db list namespaces
```

## Running Tests

The script `run_test.sh` runs `container-explorer` tests on sample containerd data generated by using `containerd-specimens` (https://github.com/dfirlabs/containerd-specimens).

1. Clone `container-explorer` and `containerd-specimens`

```
$ git clone https://github.com/google/container-explorer
$ git clone https://github.com/dfirlabs/containerd-specimens
```

2. Change directory to `containerd-specimens`

```
$ cd containerd-specimens
```

3. Run `generate-specimens.sh` script to generate test data

```
$ sudo bash generate-specimens.sh
```

**NOTE** If the script `generate-specimens.sh` does not generate test data.
You can run `reset-containerd.sh` to uninstall and install containerd package.

**!!WARNING!!**: `reset-containerd.sh` deletes existing containers. Please use carefully.

4. Change directory to `container-explorer`

```
$ cd ../container-explorer
```

5. Run `container-explorer` test script `run_test.sh`

```
$ sudo bash run_test.sh
```
